# Reflections 2023

*These are the thoughts and musings of Danny Ryan.*
*They should be considered inevitably shortsighted and biased.*

After the Merge, I’ve spent quite a bit of time reflecting on the past 5 years as we look forward toward the phases to come. I intended to write some reflections during 2022, but the time never felt quite right -- the engine was generally well-oiled, firing on all cylinders, and the core mission was abundantly clear: end proof-of-work.

Now, here we are, having accomplished what I believe to be the most significant upgrade in blockchain history, successfully carrying our momentum forward to ship withdrawals and initial scaling upgrades, and sitting upon the precipice of many more years of critical tasks and upgrades. Ethereum has never stood stronger as "Ethereum Killers" waffle in the uncertainty of a bear market and Bitcoin's culture and technology flounder in a vapid wasteland (but ordinals?!), while we continue to build, refine, philosophize, and make an impact.

The technological roadmap lying before us is both long and complex, but I worry less about being able to execute and the associated timelines. We simultaneously have proven our ability to deliver at an exceedingly high level and have validated that the Ethereum ecosystem's decision to do things the *right* way (often, the hard way) has made and continues to make Ethereum more resilient across all dimensions. In the midst of massive industry fraud, Ethereum stands strong. In the depths of a bear market, Ethereum continues to build and innovate. In an increasingly shaky global landscape, Ethereum finds ways to make an impact where it matters.

While I will reflect a bit on the technological challenges to come, these reflections are anchored more on the existential questions -- layer 1 ecosystem health, capture, cartels, L2 alignment, and more.

## Technology

By any standard, Ethereum accomplished something amazing in 2022. No one thought the Merge could have gone as well as it did. Even with years of delays, this was a watershed moment for the Ethereum protocol, the Ethereum community, and crypto at large. Ethereum has proven that it can not only accomplish huge technological goals but can do so in a largely decentralized manner. The Merge is a unique accomplishment -- no other project has come close to the combination of technological sophistication, caliber of execution, and global decentralization.

The Merge has proven to me and the rest of the world not only that this kind of project and structure can work but that when it does, it is stronger and more resilient for it.

Shifting to proof-of-stake took a bit longer than any of us expected. When I first started at the EF, Aya Miyaguchi asked me in spring of 2018 when we would be done with Proof-of-Stake. I believe I replied something like "8 months". For more reason than one, I undershot that to a comical degree, but here we are, with a multi-layered, richly multi-client, resilient ecosystem and protocol supporting a level of staking decentralization that no other blockchain has even attempted. Yes, there are aspects to improve, yes there are protocols and companies vying to try to control it all, but Ethereum PoS is live and well.

### The road is yet long

Although The Merge allowed us to breathe a bit easier with the laying of a critical sustainability and security milestone, the road before us is still long. Especially when considering where we stand in 2023 -- special interests are increasing in sophistication, regulatory action seems all but inevitable, and applications and layer 2 protocols are hungry for scalability and a stable footing upon which to architect for the decades to come.

Take a brief look at [Vitalik's roadmap document](https://twitter.com/VitalikButerin/status/1588669782471368704), and you cannot help but feel the dizzying weight of the many long and complex years (5, 10?) ahead until the protocol is "done". We must not become complacent in the delivery of The Merge, but instead utilize the momentum, the expertise, the tools, and the processes to tackle the *many* challenges still in store.

But what does it mean “to be done”? On all axes -- find the sufficient end state. What is *functional* enough, *secure* enough, *decentralized* enough, and so forth. It is critical to be a bit more philosophically and technically clear on what is being optimized and to what minimum thresholds. Clarity here will help set priorities and find the right complexity/functionality tradeoff in the years to come. Not to mention, help in the journey to ossify -- a bit more on that later.

### Immediate technological concerns

Although we still have quite a bit to do, much of the problem space no longer gives me too much worry. That said, there are still active areas of R&D that need focus in the short and medium term. This is a selection of some of some of those technical items.

#### PoS evolution

Between proposer build separation (PBS), LMD-GHOST confirmation rules, single slot finality (SSF), single secret leader election (SSLE), proof of custody (PoC), proof of execution (PoE), and early RANDAO reveal slashing, there is a non-trivial amount to research, specify, and build to continue to evolve Ethereum Proof-of-Stake into its final, most secure, most sustainable form.

Much of the above has to do with reducing or eliminating gameability, cartel pain points, tragedy of the commons, and honesty assumptions, hardening the protocol even under exceptional and highly adversarial circumstances. Although the network ultimately can fallback to social recovery, there is still work to be done to ensure the protocol can handle the largest breadth of attack scenarios without intervention.

#### DAS in practice

Data availability sampling (DAS) is an elegant mathematical solution to the [data availability problem](https://github.com/ethereum/research/wiki/A-note-on-data-availability-and-erasure-coding#what-is-the-data-availability-problem), but when the construction meets the practical p2p network, instantiating it in an efficient and robust manner is non-trivial. In 2022, many teams joined the charge to solve this problem -- both academic and hands-on engineering -- but there is still much work to reach a sufficient solution.

The problem is not intractable, but the design landscape is quite large and tuning the right balance between complexity and robustness is not obvious. If we were willing to make concessions on decentralization and robustness, DAS could reuse off-the-shelf networking components that would work fine in the happy case. But given that an attack on this networking construction can totally disrupt the liveness of the chain, it is critical that care be taken in designing not only a system that works but is as resilient as the other areas of the protocol.

EIP-4844 lays the foundation for scaling data and gives us a parameter -- the data-gas limit -- to tune as DAS methods can handle more load. I suggest being very conservative in increasing this parameter -- e.g. setting data-gas limit far below theoretical limits, running DAS in parallel to full 4844 downloads for some time, having very high network redundancy, etc.

It stands to be debated in what order DAS will roll out in relation to many other competing upgrades -- stateless being the other obvious major contender. My gut is to give DAS more time to mature and to focus on non-scaling upgrades for 12+ months after 4844 (stateless, security improvements, PBS, etc), while simultaneously incrementally increasing the data-gas limit from its initial parametrization after mainnet observations and the potential integration of more advanced gossip techniques such as episub.

#### MEV, pandora's box

One of the core themes of the past 24 months has been Maximum Extractable Value (MEV) -- not only the impact at the application layer but also the impact and interaction with Layer 1 consensus and security. This has been akin to opening Pandora's box. MEV has turned much of what we thought we knew and wished was simple into a much more complex soup of incentives, attacks, and more. MEV has a centralizing impact on the validator set, rewards cartels far more than before, directly incentivizes reorgs, and complicates the simple user-validator model by bringing in a whole host of new PvP players.

MEV made a moderately high impact on what needs to be completed before Ethereum can be considered "done". The protocol cannot be left MEV-unaware, or else the incentives here will destabilize and potentially destroy the network. This includes mitigations such as proposer-builder-separation (PBS), MEV-burn, single-slot-finality (SSF), and censorship resistance in the context of PBS.

I remain torn between advocating for shipping MEV mitigations absolutely as fast as possible (the threat is real) and taking more time to understand the problem and solutions and allow the research to evolve. I worry that even though we've grown leaps and bounds in our understanding of this problem space, that the research is still nascent and what we might build today won't be sufficient for Ethereum’s long-term needs.

The counter to taking our time is that the inherent incentives of the MEV landscape ensure that solutions, networks, products, etc are built and often with rapid adoption and impact. If we do not act fast, third party solutions and activities will become, define, and potentially erode critical norms.

#### Complexity

Complexity is evil.

Ethereum is complex and is only becoming more so. I worry this dynamic system is or will become too complex to handle, to reason about, and to secure.

Modularity, where at all possible, is critical to handling the complexity of the system. We “fell into” the separation of execution and consensus, and much complexity is masked through the use of libp2p on the (consensus) networking layer and robust, audited/verified libraries on the cryptographic layer. This allows for isolated correctness of each component and specialization of the associated individuals and teams which can then be aggregated into a more complex whole.

Additionally, we must not extend the core protocol beyond what is minimally sufficient in any domain. The move beyond sufficiency encumbers the protocol with unnecessary complexity.

## L1 coordination game

We've seen fantastic growth in the coordination and organization of efforts surrounding the delivery of L1 Ethereum. Client teams have matured, devops aids with testnets, testing resources have increased, and much complexity was separated across two layers.

### L1 development

We have grown leaps and bounds during the past 5 years in our ability to ship complex upgrades to the protocol while simultaneously welcoming in a 5-fold increase in the number of teams and individuals involved -- increasing the resilience in terms of both software as well as mindshare. No single team or organization remains a linchpin to protocol development and health.

The Consensus-Layer client ecosystem, diversity of expertise, and now diversity of usage is a crowning achievement. The Execution-Layer client ecosystem began with far more asymmetries and thus has taken more time to reach a similar level of expertise and reliability, but I believe that we are primed to finally shift mainnet usage numbers away from 80%+ geth dominance throughout 2023. In fact, the Merge was an inflection point here.

### Incentives

At the peak of the bull market, I and many others were very concerned about incentives for working on Ethereum L1, both compared to Ethereum's application and L2 layers as well as competitor L1s. In all alternative opportunities, token incentives are available which hold the potential for very high upside with highly liquid offerings.

During the bull-market there were crazy valuations of liquid offerings. Thus, we were facing a mixture of actual turn-over combined with a more insidious, growing resentment towards the vast differences between working on critical infrastructure and building on top. I'm not sure I put my finger on it at the time, but in retrospect, there was a sour feeling toward the spectacular wealth accumulating to layers built upon L1 teams’ backs. Regarding alternative L1s, some claimed that these misaligned incentives were fundamental in blockchain development and that alt-L1s will always be a source of drain and squash established L1s. These arguments felt naive even at the time, but still the impact and the negative sentiment mounted.

Although I’m unsure if Ethereum L1 work will ever hold the asymmetric upside that is possible in a startup, there are now many positive movements in L1 development incentives. The Protocol Guild one-year pilot raised over $12M for 120+ members from more than 20 teams. Retro-active public goods funding experiments might prove to at least partially support the software and security that applications and L2s rely upon. And, other funding mechanisms such as gitcoin and clr.fund continue to innovate to support public goods across the ecosystem. Additionally, I see a lot of promise in other funding experiments in the social layer such as opt-in staker TX-fee/MEV splitter contracts (e.g. 1% of your staking tx fees go to your utilized clients).

## Capture

There are now a non-trivial number of well-resourced and sophisticated entities with a deep interest in not only the success but the manipulation of the Ethereum protocol. Such entities do not appear to generally have malice in intent today, but they do have a lot riding on the protocol evolving in certain ways and at certain speeds. To this end, L2s, VCs, exchanges, and dapps have entered into the L1 governance and development process. We are in a unique time in which Ethereum has these special interests forming and coming to the table, but many areas of the protocol, by almost any standard, are not yet sufficient, not yet ossified. This makes the next few years particularly risky.

A few years ago these interested and sophisticated/well-resourced entities simply didn't exist or didn't consider "helping out" and getting their hands dirty. It was primarily the EF, client teams, and various independents in the core protocol dialogue. And, if in a few years (3? 5? 10?) such parties showed up to help, the protocol might be much more ossified and interested parties helping would hold less risk. In fact, entities that depend on the health and stability of the Ethereum network taking ownership of critical infrastructure is probably a long-term necessity. Right now, though, ownership of infrastructure implies a voice in a still nascent protocol. Eventually, the malleable components of the protocol will be smaller and less critical -- networking protocols, light client communications, content delivery networks, etc -- the elements surrounding the core. But, at this unique point, there is enough on the line that big interests exist, but the protocol can very much still be manipulated by navigating the less-than-ossified, messy, human process of upgrades.

Given the interests increasingly at the table, there is a desire to find a balance and give non-client devs/non-researchers a voice in governance. It's a hard line to attempt to gate-keep all others, when in fact there's never really been a gate -- show up, do the work with integrity, you're welcomed in. Those that show up have increasingly complex backgrounds and incentives. This extends even to core maintainers as conflicts of interest mount -- investors in applications/L2s, representatives of DAOs, advisors to VCs, corporate allegiances, and various product offerings; not to mention the varied geopolitical affiliations as the global landscape takes increasingly deep looks at crypto.

I hold deeply that formalization of anything beyond "developers write code, user run software" is long-term, existentially dangerous for Ethereum. I've seen the community call for structures akin to political parties or lobbying interest groups. The more structure given to this process, the more the structure can be abused (captured) and becomes less likely to ever be removed (anti-ossification).

Consensus is difficult, but Ethereum has been surprisingly good at the current minimal and messy process. It is not perfect. It cannot and will not always pick the optimal path, but we are not just vying for feature and delivery optimality. We are striving for a protocol that is sufficient, robust in guarantee, and hardened against capture.

I suggest we add the fewest additional governance structures as possible over the next 5 years and focus more on softer things such as philosophical alignment, a strong culture of only mission critical upgrades, and fostering bi-directional communication between devs and the extended community in organic, less formal forums. That said, the governance process is a beast that can be stewarded but not controlled outright. Individuals can impact the outcomes here through soft guidance and philosophical musings and can speak up if things really get off course, but Ethereum governance is an independent organism controlled by no single party at this point.

### Client -- buy or build?

Even if the protocol development and upgrade process is bound to "developers write code, users run software" and new formal structures are not added, working on and maintaining a client is still the entrypoint for *anyone* into the dialogue and process.

As we've seen in 2022, this can either be done by "buy" (Arbitrum -> Prysm) or "build" (Paradigm -> reth), each having their own profile on difficulty, legitimacy, and sustainability. For example, buying a client is relatively straightforward but likely at a cost to legitimacy, and the sustainability of the influence is tenuous at best -- clients are composed of individuals and an acquiring company can likely shift priorities and perspective only so much before individuals would simply leave or defect. Whereas building a client is much more difficult, but more legitimate and sustainable. Both of these experiments are important to watch play out in 2023.

Ethereum development and governance relies upon an aggregate culture of security-first, philosophically aligned development. My assessment is that in the current configuration one or two wildcard client teams or individuals would have a very hard time altering the path or feature-set in a way we could call "capture" because of the full group's general ability to evaluate proposals on merit as well as the general philosophical lens with which to prioritize and steer the ship. My worries here are if new entrants compound with other individuals on client teams slipping in "alignment" or if some existing, aligned client teams leave or additional client teams are bought or created by less-than-aligned entities over the next few years.

The multi-client ethos and ecosystem is one of Ethereum’s super powers, leading to far more resilience, legitimacy, and security through a multitude of software and perspective. This is one of the many ways that Ethereum has become an intellectual gravity well, which I believe is one of the primary feedback loops that makes Ethereum nearly unstoppable. I do not suggest attempting to gate this informal client team access point. Instead, I suggest keeping the door wide open and explicitly welcoming in more, deeply aligned client teams in the coming years. While we’re at it, it’d be great to simultaneously enhance Ethereum client team geographic and jurisdictional diversity. Today, there are some very over- and very under-represented areas of the globe. Deepening global client representation will make Ethereum more resilient while further amplifying the reach of its intellectual gravity well.

## Ossification

Ossification. Something I increasingly see as critical to the long-term health and success of Ethereum, yet something I see as less and less tangible, especially anytime soon (5, 10 years?). Not only do we have quite a bit of work to do before Ethereum might be considered "done", but a culture of eventual-ossification does not seem dominant within the Ethereum community and is split amongst client teams, at best.

Bitcoin has tarnished the idea of ossification. The ossified Bitcoin is seen by the Ethereum community as a useless protocol upheld in a religious fervor by an intellectual cesspit, unable to follow any line of reason that does not either glorify the perfection of Bitcoin or admonish all other designs. This does raise the question -- is this due to the particulars of what is ossified (Bitcoin in this instance) or the act of ossification, itself. My intuition is that the religious, anti-intellectualism spurs from the *insufficiency* of Bitcoin. The Bitcoin protocol is not sufficient to meet the demands of it and thus the reason of its supporters has become warped to support the state in which it is ossified.

I believe that a protocol that is *sufficient* for its task (secure-enough, extensible-enough, capacity-enough in our case) can have a coherent argument about its resultant ossified state. Thus the ideology of the surrounding community does not need to enter into religious territory to defend the choice. Additionally, in our case, I believe that the fluid and extensible nature of layers supported by the ossified protocol allow the community to remain intellectually engaged through the exploration and optimization of such higher layers. That is, some community members worry that without an ever evolving protocol, Ethereum would lose its allure, intellectual mindshare, and many of the things that make it so special, so alive. I argue that as long as layer 2 support is sufficiently rich, we can have our cake and eat it too -- be ossified in the secure foundation while still supporting the vibrant intellectual exploration and optimization in the ecosystem at a higher level. That is the dream, at least.

### A fool's errand?

But is ossification a fool's errand? Is this actually achievable in the Ethereum context? And what does ossification actually mean to be useful? Must ossification be absolute or can we be "pretty ossified" to get most of the value? Finally, does earnest ossification-intent protect us enough -- does the threat of ever-imminent ossification keep the process on the critical path, ensure a more narrow focus (alignment?), and bolster the immune system against special interests and capture?

I do begin to worry that ossification on any near time horizon is unrealistic due to the long list of upgrades and security improvements still considered on the critical path -- sharding, PoS evolution (SSF, PBS, etc), security improvements (SSLE, custody game, proof of execution, etc), statelessness, ZK-EVM, quantum resistant cryptography, etc. Given the complexity of the tasks at hand and the general speed of shipping, this is no fewer than 5 years and easily even 10, and I worry that advancements in cryptography as well as emergent problems are liable to keep the list growing and changing for the foreseeable future.

Then, if this is an unending process, does the rate of change at least slow? Maybe a more useful definition of ossification is a trend rather than a final outcome -- that it becomes increasingly difficult and requires more justification, effort, and time to get any change into the protocol. That the activation energy to enact a change gets above some critical threshold *eventually*. Or maybe it isn't that the protocol can truly ossify but that instead the best we can do is always be-in-dialogue-with ossification. If the ethos is to *attempt* to ossify or to be in a much more ossified state rather than to always expect, desire, or need change, then the dialogue of ossification will bias towards change-skepticism. Enough skepticism here might be sufficient to protect the protocol even as the protocol (slowly) evolves.

As I reflect this year, I begin to believe that this dialogue with ossification is not only the best we can do but in a world in which we cannot predict tomorrow, ensures that Ethereum does not reach a local maximum that is insufficient for what is to come. But I also believe that the ossificationers -- those that bias toward slowing down, that bias towards only changing certain components if absolutely necessary, that fear ever mounting complexity and the impact of change on the layers above -- are too small a cohort in both the core L1 process and the greater community today. This camp and ethos is not yet strong enough to be the requisite immune system of the protocol. While there are many respected voices in this camp to ensure some minimum threshold, the arguments and virtues of a tending-toward-ossified protocol must be expounded upon over the next few years such that the scales do not tip too far in the other direction during this complex, still changing, and critical time.

## L2 alignment

A great aspect about the L2-centric roadmap is that it allows L1 to punt all sorts of design decisions (cross-domain communications, VM choice and optimizations, parallelization, state management, etc) to "the market" instead of having to painstakingly (and likely non-optimally) pick and implement particular solutions. This market of ideas, layered on top of Ethereum L1, stands to not only find good solutions in the near term but to remain adaptable to the world's growing and changing needs for the decades to come. Need parallelization? A new L2 can try it out. A better VM that supports necessary formal verification emerges? L2s can adapt or new L2s can pop up. This anti-ossified landscape layered on top of a relatively ossified base layer really is the best of both worlds.

And on the health of this market -- the Ethereum L2 ecosystem is doing moderately well. A few different optimistic EVM routes are in motion, many different EVM-compatible/equivalent/wtf zk-rollups are racing to the gates, and a couple of odd-ball more experimental rollups sit on the fringes (Fuel, anyone?). Some believe the exploration is in a bit of a rut -- EVM, EVM, EVM -- and wish there were more dramatic departures from the L1 structure -- Solana-rollup, hyper parallelized rollup, etc --, but the market can still adapt as some of the current ideas thrive or fail. The EVM seems to be a moat so inside the moat most are building.

One thing I worry about, given all the eggs are in the L2-basket, is L2 alignment, both short and long-term. There are two primary issues -- (1) L2s being parasitic and ultimately forking away to become their own L1 and (2) L2s being Ethereum's standard-bearer and where users interact but not holding Ethereum's values -- decentralization, censorship resistance, supporting public goods, radical collaboration, etc.

The former is more of an existential question – is it actually valuable to be anchored onto the Ethereum security zone? This is essentially the thesis of the L2 roadmap -- that these scalable environments inheriting Ethereum's security and native bridging are valuable to users and thus valuable to developers, companies, and communities building and maintaining them. I believe this thesis -- bootstrapping sufficient crypto-economic security is hard and most chains will inevitably fail to meet sufficient levels in the increasingly adversarial environment. Crypto-economic security is a finite resource as a function of sustained economic demand for these systems. So while I do expect some L2s to "rug" Ethereum and attempt departures -- some might succeed, others will fail --, I do not believe these will happen en masse, and a few L2s leaving does not break the crypto-economic-security-as-a-service thesis.

As for (2), I have much more concern. L2s will inevitably become the primary touch-point for the vast majority of users. They will exist within, interact with, and bridge across L2s in most scenarios because these will be both secure and affordable. Thus, the face of Ethereum becomes the L2s themselves. Maybe secure, but are these decentralized, are they censorship resistant, do they hold Ethereum's values, do they inspire the world to continually reimagine itself? At this point, the answers to these questions are not clearly in the affirmative. VCs have their tendrils deep into L2s. Tokens have been anywhere from poorly to horrendously distributed to insiders. And, most governance models are plutocratic and can be arbitrarily upgraded without notice. This is not to mention that most L2s make sacrifices in their security models to go-to-market with the intent to iteratively decentralize over time (e.g. no fraud proofs, single sequencers, unclear emergency exit mechanics, etc).

There is an interesting balance here. L2s can and hopefully will pour more into advertisement and business development, competing with alt-L1s that are oh-so-aggressive in this department. This allows Ethereum L1 to remain neutral in this regard while the layers above experiment with a multitude of user acquisition and onboarding techniques. But, it's not obvious that L2s will by default retain Ethereum's brand, value, and soul.

Stewarding a healthy L2 ecosystem is paramount. This will take many dimensions to get right -- researching and promoting secure constructions, supporting efforts that shine a flashlight on L2s (illuminating them as they are, not as they are portrayed), nudging L2s where possible on governance risks, security trade-offs, poor token distributions, values alignment, and other emergent issues. And we must not only focus on the negative, but celebrate the positive, celebrate the secure, celebrate the aligned. The Ethereum community today holds immense power in setting the norms that will define how this L2 movement plays out for decades to come. We must ensure that L2s not only inherit Ethereum’s security but also its *legitimacy*.

## In conclusion

As I mentioned at the start, this is an incredibly short-sighted and biased view of things. There are many problems and even more successes that I am either unaware of or didn’t have time to fit in here.

In short, Ethereum stands stronger than ever. The community building the core infrastructure, the community layering in scaling, and the community building on top are astounding to be a part of and to observe. But, there are still major challenges; there are still immense risks.

*Ethereum is alive and well. Do your part to keep it that way.*

